Hi everyone, welcome to today's tutorial,
where we will be looking
at visualization in pandas.
pandas uses matplotlib under the hood, and
provides some convenient functions for
visualizing data.
Before we dive into
visualization in pandas,
lets take a look at
the matplotlib's style package.
Matplotlib comes with a number
of predefined styles,
which we can choose from,
to change the default look of our plots.
Because pandas is using
matplotlib under the hood,
this will change the default style
of our pandas graphs as well.
We can use plt.style.available to
see the predefined styles provided.
Let's use the seaborn-colorblind style,
which will change the default colors of
our plots to use a color palette that is
more color vision deficiency friendly.
Now, where the built-in visualization
of pandas really shines is in
helping with fast and
easy plotting of series and
DataFrames that can help
us explore the data.
Let's make a DataFrame.
First, we'll set the seed for
the random number generator,
which will allow us to reproduce the data.
Next, let's add three columns
of random time series data.
We can generate the random data by
cumulatively summing up random numbers.
numpi has a great function for this called
cumsum, which cumulatively sums an array
Let's do this for
three columns, A, B and C.
And also offset the B column by + 20 and
the C column by- 20.
Using date_range, we can set
the index to be everyday in 2017.
Now let's see what this data looks like a
little more visually to plot this data we
can use the plot method on the DataFrame.
The plot method on series and DataFrame
is just a simple wrapper around plt.plot.
So when we call df.plot,
we get a line graph of all the columns
in the data frame with labels.
Notice how the colors are slightly
different from the default matplotlib
colors because of the style we used.
Also, notice this cool
Jupyter Notebook trick.
If you add a semicolon to
the end of the plotting call,
this will suppress unwanted output.
And this works with regular matplotlib,
too.
DataFrame.plot allows us to plot
a number of different kinds of plots.
We can select which plot we want to use
by pressing it into the kind parameter.
Let's try and create a scatter plot
that takes the A and B columns of df.
We pass in scatter to the kind
parameter to change the plot type.
This is what we'd get if we
called plt.plot on the A and
B columns with the point marker parameter.
Passing scatter into
the kind keyword argument
changed the plot to a scatterplot.
You can also choose the plot
kind by using the methods
dataframe.plot.kind instead of
providing the kind keyword argument.
Now let's try this and
create something a little more complex.
This time we want to make a scatterplot
with points varying in color and size.
We'll use df.plot.scatter,
pass in columns A and C.
And set the color C and size S to
change based on the value of column B.
Finally, we can choose
the color palette used
by passing a string into
the parameter color map.
Here, I'll use viridis,
which is particularly pleasing to the eye.
Here we can see the A and
C columns plotted against one another with
the size and color changing based
on the values of the B column.
Because df.plot.scatter returns
a matplotlib.axes._subplot, we can perform
modification on this object just like
objects returned by matplotlib plots.
For example, let's see what it looks
like when we change the aspect ratio of
the AxesSubplot to equal.
Setting the aspect ratio to equal allows
the viewer to easily see that the range of
series A is much smaller than series C.
Using pandas, we can also easily
do box plots, Histograms,
And kernel density estimate plots.
Which are useful for
visualizing an estimate of a variable's
probability density function.
Kernel density estimation plots come in
handy in data science application
where you want to derive a smooth continuous
function from a given sample.
Pandas also has plotting tools that help
with visualizing large amounts of data or
high dimensional data.
Let's explore a couple of these tools
by loading in the iris flower data set.
The iris data set is a classic
multivariate data set,
which includes the sepal length,
sepal width, petal length, and
petal width
for hundreds of samples
of three species of the iris flower.
pandas has a plotting tool that allows
us to create a scatter matrix from a DataFrame.
A scatter matrix is a way of
comparing each column in a DataFrame
to every other column
in a pairwise fashion.
Let's use it to visualize
the iris dataframe and
see what insights we
can gain from our data.
The scatter matrix creates scatter plots
between the different variables and
histograms along the diagonals.
This allows us to quickly see some of
the more obvious patterns in the data set.
Looking at the scatter plots, it appears
that there are some distinct groupings of
the points, which might indicate that
there could be some clustering going on.
And while this looks impressive and
is certainly useful, realize that in
the last two weeks you have gained all of
the skills to manually build these
kinds of plots if you want to.
This is nothing more than a four
by four grid of subplots,
with some plots histograms and
the others scatterplots.
Let's look at one more plotting tool
in pandas which will help us visualize
multivariate data.
pandas includes a plotting tool for
creating parallel coordinates plots.
Parallel coordinate plots are a common
way of visualizing high dimensional multivariate data.
Each variable in the data set
corresponds to an equally
spaced parallel vertical line.
The values of each variable are then
connected by lines between for
each individual observation.
Coloring the lines by class,
in this example the species of flower,
allows the viewer to more easily
see any patterns or clustering.
For instance, looking at our iris data
set, we can see that the petal length and
petal width are two variables that split
the different species fairly clearly.
With iris virginica having the longest and
widest petals.
And iris setosa having the shortest and
narrowest petals.
Well that's it for
visualization in pandas.
In the next video, we'll look at Seaborn,
a powerful package for statistical plotting.